[RFC 0127] Nixpkgs "problem" infrastructure (#127)
NixOS/rfcs: rfcs/0127-issues-warnings.md

Apart from that, there is need for a general per-package warning mechanism in nixpkgs – one that is stronger than `builtins.trace`.

## Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### Package issues

A new attribute is added to the `meta` section of a package: `issues`. If present, it is a list of attrsets which each have the following fields:

- `message`: Required. A string message describing the issue with the package. Linking issues and pull requests is encouraged.
- `kind`: Optional but recommended. If present, the resulting warning will be printed as `kind: message`.
- `date`: Required. An ISO 8601 `yyyy-mm-dd`-formatted date from when the issue was added.

Example values:

```nix
meta.issues = [{
  kind = "deprecated";

>   message = "This package depends on Python 2, which has reached end of life. #148779";

Reviewer: Since this is already structured data, we can do:
```suggestion
  message = "This package depends on Python 2, which has reached end of life.";
  githubIssue = 148779;
```
or have a `url` attr that links to the issue.

---
feature: issues-warnings
start-date: 2022-06-11
author: piegames
co-authors: (find a buddy later to help out with the RFC)
shepherd-team: (names, to be nominated and accepted by RFC steering committee)
shepherd-leader: (name to be appointed by RFC steering committee)
related-issues: https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/177272
---

# RFC: Nixpkgs issues and warnings

## Summary
[summary]: #summary

Introduce an issue system into Nixpkgs, similar to broken and insecure, but with a custom per-package message. This will then be used to warn users about packages that are in need of maintenance. Packages that have an open issue for a long time should eventually be removed.

## Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Nixpkgs has the problem that it is often treated as "append-only", i.e. packages only get added but not removed. There are a lot of packages that are broken for a long time, have end-of-life dependencies with known security vulnerabilities or that are otherwise unmaintained.

> Let's take the end of life of Python 2 as an example. (This applies to other ecosystems as well, and will come up again and again in the future.) It has sparked a few bulk package removal actions by dedicated persons, but those are pretty work intensive and prone to burn out maintainers. A goal of this RFC is to provide a way to notify all users of a package about the outstanding issues. This will hopefully draw more attention to abandoned packages, and spread the work load. It can also help soften the removal of packages by providing a period for users to migrate away at their own pace.

Reviewer 2: > A goal of this RFC is to provide a way to notify all users of a package about the outstanding issues

And maintainers too I hope! I maintain some packages that I rarely use (like, yearly or so), so I would miss the user notification and would only get the removal notification.

Author: Ideally, we'd already have functioning pinging infrastructure in place so that this RFC would only apply to unmaintained packages. I know that at the moment we have some room for improvement on regarding maintainer pings, but that issue is out of scope for this RFC.

> notify all users of a package

Since the warnings happen at evaluation time, "users" refers to all people having the package installed or somehow in scope. So if you are a maintainer, it suffices to keep your packages installed.

Reviewer 2: > So if you are a maintainer, it suffices to keep your packages installed.

I maintain ~80 packages, and I don't use all of them all the time from the unstable branch, so it would take a while for me to notice

Apart from that, there is need for a general per-package warning mechanism in nixpkgs – one that is stronger than `builtins.trace`.

## Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### Package issues

A new attribute is added to the `meta` section of a package: `issues`. If present, it is a list of attrsets which each have the following fields:

- `message`: Required. A string message describing the issue with the package.

> - `kind`: Optional but recommended. If present, the resulting warning will be printed as `kind: message`.

Reviewer 3: Just to clearify: The "kind" field should note what kind of message this is? Basically like a log level? And the example here is the "log level" `message`? I am confused with the `message` key from the line above. Maybe the wording needs to be clearer here.

Reviewer 4: Different kinds are presented here: https://github.com/piegamesde/rfcs-1/blob/rfc-127/rfcs/0127-issues-warnings.md#bike-shedding.

- `date`: Required. An ISO 8601 `yyyy-mm-dd`-formatted date from when the issue was added.

> - `urls`: Optional, list of strings. Can be used to link issues, pull requests and other related items.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- `urls`: Optional, list of strings. Can be used to link issues, pull requests and other related items.

Other attributes are allowed. Their meanings may be kind-specific.
```

Reviewer 3: How about adding a field `CVEs` to the RFC?

Reviewer 3: Also: Would it be an idea to also add an optional `nixpkgs-issues` (list of URLs possibly) field here and only use the `urls` field for "upstream" links?

E.G.: 

```nix
{ nixpkgs-issues = [ "https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs/issues/123" ];
, urls = [ "https://github.com/someorg/somerepo/issues/4211" ];
, ...
}
```

I know that looks burdensome at first glance, but maybe worth to give a thought.

Author: There are more URLs than just nixpkgs issues and upstream issues. One may link to announcement posts or CVEs or other distributions in there. Also, nixpkgs issues are relatively easy to filter out with a simple string prefix match if necessary.

} {
  kind = "removal";
  message = "The application has been abandoned upstream, use libfoo instead";
  date = "1970-01-01";
}];
```

### nixpkgs integration

Two new config options are added to nixpkgs, `ignoreWarningsPredicate` and `ignoreWarningsPackages`. A new environment variable is defined, `NIXPKGS_IGNORE_WARNINGS`. Their semantic and implementation directly parallel the existing "insecure" package handling.

Similarly to broken, insecure and unfree packages, evaluating a package with an issue fails evaluation. Ignoring a package without issues (i.e. they have all been resolved) results in a warning at evaluation time.

## Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

### Package removal

There are two ways issues interact with the removal of packages: Either they get an issue because they are going to be removed, or they are removed because they have an open issue for a prolonged period of time.

- Instead of removing a package directly, it should first get an issue announcing the planned removal. This will allow users to migrate away beforehand. `removal` must be used as `kind` (This will facilitate automation in the future).

> - Before branch-off for a new release, all (leaf) packages with issues that predate the previous branch-off are deemed safe for removal (unless stated otherwise). If a package is removed based on its issue, that message becomes part of the new `throw` alias.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Before branch-off for a new release, all (leaf) packages with issues that predate the previous branch-off are deemed safe for removal (unless stated otherwise). If a package is removed based on its issue, the issue's message becomes part of the new `throw` alias.
```

### Propagation across transitive dependencies

> When a package that is depended on has an issue, all packages that depend on it will fail to evaluate until that package is ignored or the issue resolved. Sometimes, this is sufficient.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When a package has an issue, all packages that depend on it will fail to evaluate until that package is ignored or the issue resolved. Sometimes, this is sufficient.
```

When the issue requires actions on dependents however, it does not sufficiently inform about all packages that need action. Marking all dependents with that issue is not a good idea either though: it would require users to go through some potentially long dependency chains. Instead, only applications, leaf packages or packages with very few dependents should get the issue.

> As an example, take `gksu` with the `gksu` → `libgksu` → `libglade` → `python2` dependency chain (for the sake of the example, ignore that it also depends on EOL Gtk 2). Obviously, `python2` should get an issue. As a leaf/application, `gksu` should get one too (it could be the same, or with an adpated message). For the packages in between, it depends on whether they require individual action or not.

Reviewer 5: Does this mean that in an evaluation that involves gksu, both the warning for gksu and the warning for python2 will be printed, even if that's the only path through which the evaluation depends on python2? I'm not sure I like that.

Author: Since warnings are evaluation errors, the evaluation stops after printing the first warning.

Reviewer 6: That seems painful if there's no way to opt out, if you're adding a new warning type you should be able to get it to eval as far as it can and list everything. Also [Hydra](https://github.com/nixos/nixpkgs/blob/022caabb5f2265ad4006c1fa5b1ebe69fb0c3faf/pkgs/stdenv/generic/check-meta.nix#L190-L194).

Author: In the updated proposal most of the time problems will be printed via `builtins.trace`. However, in the cases that fail eval with `throw` it will stop at the first error. There's no easy way around that, and fixing that is out of scope of this RFC.

Reviewer 6: "issues and warnings" in the title, «problems» in your message, «warning»s being used almost exclusively in the RFC text. Needs better terminology.

Author: Yeah the terms keep changing because naming things is hard and people remain unsatisfied. If you count the original "advisories" from the pre-RFC, we're in the fourth naming iteration or something.

### Backporting

New issues generally should not be added to stable branches, and also not be backported to them, since this breaks evaluation.

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> - People have voiced strong negative opionions about the prospect of removing packages from nixpkgs at all, especially when they still *technically* work.

Reviewer 5: These drawbacks should be addressed with why we think it's worth it.
```suggestion
- People have voiced strong negative opionions about the prospect of removing packages from nixpkgs at all, especially when they still *technically* work.
  - We do not want to encourage the use of unmaintained software likely to contain security vulnerabilities, and already provide old software with less-than-typical friction by having complete binary cache coverage of old nixpkgs versions.
```

Author: Applied different wording locally.

> - There is a slight long-term maintenance burden. It is expected to be similar to or slightly greater than the maintenance of our deprecation aliases.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- There is a slight long-term maintenance burden. It is expected to be similar to or slightly greater than the maintenance of our deprecation aliases.
  - We expect that in the long term, having a defined process for removing unmaintained and obsolete packages, especially compared to deciding on a case-by-case basis, is likely to reduce the overall maintenance burden.
```

> - Some of the example interactions are built on the premise that nixpkgs is under-maintained, and that most users are at least somewhat involved in the nixpkgs development process. At the time of writing this RFC this is most certainly true, but the effects on this in the future are unknown.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Some of the example interactions are built on the premise that parts of nixpkgs are under-maintained, and that most users are at least somewhat involved in the nixpkgs development process. At the time of writing this RFC this is most certainly true, but the effects on this in the future are unknown.
  - We hope that drawing attention to packages in need of maintenance can encourage new maintainers -- both from the existing pool of nixpkgs contributors and from non-contributor users -- to step up.
```

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- "in-band" maintenance of this data means that users have to upgrade their nixpkgs to become aware of new issues.
  - The proposed approach has significantly less overhead than designing and maintaining a separate database along with tools to combine its data with nixpkgs. We are open to an alternative approach in the future, but do not want to incur such high maintenance costs at this time.

```

Author: Add as sub-point: out of band warnings would be impure if they stopped evaluation like they currently do.

Reviewer 5: I imagine such a tool not blocking evaluation at all, but providing the metadata, comparing it to local policy, annotating the drvs produced with said metadata, and (when used interactively) providing a "continue anyway" knob if anything happens that's not already permitted by local policy.

I don't count that as an impurity, since I don't want it to be able to modify the evaluation results at all -- only observe evaluation and decide what to do afterwards (which also allows getting all the warnings at once, and displaying all those that local policy considers as "blocking" at once).

## Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

> An alternative design would be to have issues as a separate list (not part of the package). Instead of allowing individual packages, one could ignore individual warnings (they'd need an identifying number for that). The advantage of doing this is that one could have one issue and apply it for a lot of packages (e.g. "Python 2 is deprecated"). The main drawback there is that it is more complex.

Reviewer 3: Wouldn't be a possible solution for this to allow "transitive issues"? For example, to allow:

```
meta.issues = [
 { transitive = pkgs.python2.issues }
];
```

That might also come in handy down the road when opening issues and/or removal-PRs (possibly automated as far as I understood).

Author: Thanks, I'll add it to the alternatives section.

Although I have already settled on the current proposal, and won't discuss alternatives anymore unless somebody really wants to.

Reviewer 3: Okay, thanks! And sorry for being late to the party!

Author: This is funny because not even half a day later I have a new idea so I'm probably going to re-work everything I did so far ^^

So no, you are not too late to the party.

  - Unfree package handling will probably be out of scope, since we already have some custom filtering based on licences.
- Inspired by the automation of aliases, managing issues can be helped by tooling as well. This is deemed out of scope of this RFC because only real world usage will tell which actions will be worthwhile automating, but it should definitely considered in the future.
  - There will likely be need for tooling that lists issues on all nixpkgs packages, filtered by kind or sorted chronologically.
  - Automatically removing packages based on time will likely require providing more information whether it is safe to do so or not.
- > If the advisories were a list, and we also added them for modules, maybe we could auto-generate most release notes, and move release notes closer to the code they change. [[source]](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/pre-rfc-package-advisories/19509/4)
  - Issues can certainly be automatically integrated into the release notes somehow. However, this alone would not allow us to move most of our release notes into the packages, because for many release entries breaking eval would be overkill.

> ## Bike shedding

Reviewer 5: "Flag"?

I don't like that "issue" collides with nixpkgs's github-based issue tracking.

Reviewer 7: Thinking outside the box here. Perhaps these terms might be useful?

gate, inhibitor, flaw, condition, concern

Author: How about calling the nixpkgs config option simply by what it does, maybe something like `checkMetaHandler`? Because I think this is the only user-facing place where this entire "feature" needs a name. (For the package side, I still think "issues" is the least bad name so far)

## Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Nixpkgs has the problem that it is often treated as "append-only", i.e. packages only get added but not removed. There are a lot of packages that are broken for a long time, have end-of-life dependencies with known security vulnerabilities or that are otherwise unmaintained.

Let's take the end of life of Python 2 as an example. (This applies to other ecosystems as well, and will come up again and again in the future.) It has sparked a few bulk package removal actions by dedicated persons, but those are pretty work intensive and prone to burn out maintainers. A goal of this RFC is to provide a way to notify all users of a package about the outstanding issues. This will hopefully draw more attention to abandoned packages, and spread the work load. It can also help soften the removal of packages by providing a period for users to migrate away at their own pace.

> Apart from that, there is need for a general per-package warning mechanism in nixpkgs – one that is stronger than `builtins.trace`.

Reviewer 8: `lib.warn` can only be used in a limited fashion due to ofborg's clean eval requirement (no warning messages may be printed when doing the normal eval check iirc). We could of course lift this requirement as an alternative.

> Apart from that, there is need for a general per-package warning mechanism in nixpkgs – one that is stronger than `builtins.trace`.

Reviewer 7: (Real) warnings are an important feature, and ofborg must not stop us from using it.

We can make ofborg pass a Nixpkgs `config` flag to suppress expected warnings. This could be implemented as a list (or nested attrset) of attribute paths that have known issues, that cause ofborg to skip those attributes in its clean eval. `aliases.nix` can already serve as such a list, combined with a separate list for other issues such as described in this RFC.

## Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### Package issues

> A new attribute is added to the `meta` section of a package: `issues`. If present, it is a list of attrsets which each have at least the following fields:

Author: In the last RFC meeting we reached consensus that using an attribute set here comes with disadvantages, and that the benefit of "you can use `overrideAttrs` on it" is comparatively small. Especially, forcing every entry to have a name was a trade-off that we were not willing to make.

That being said, I discuss some ideas involving attrsets in the "Alternatives" section, you might want to take a look.

- `kind`: Required. If present, the resulting warning will be printed as `kind: message`.
- `message`: Required. A string message describing the issue with the package.
- `name`: Optional but recommended. Give the issue a custom name for more easy filtering
- `date`: Required. An ISO 8601 `yyyy-mm-dd`-formatted date from when the issue was added.
- `urls`: Optional, list of strings. Can be used to link issues, pull requests and other related items.

> - `resolved`: Optional. Indicate that the issue is resolved so that it does not generate a warning anymore.

Reviewer 9: This sounds like a bad idea and I think it's the wrong solution to the original problem it intends to solve, which I think is "ignoring all issues for a package that doesn't have any issues anymore, but then gets more issues in the future". A better solution is to not allow wildcards at least for the issue kind and require people to explicitly ignore individual ones.

But even better: Don't allow filtering by issue kind, but require filtering by issue name, which works well with changing `meta.issues` to be an attribute set with a required name.

Author: > This sounds like a bad idea and I think it's the wrong solution to the original problem it intends to solve, which I think is "ignoring all issues for a package that doesn't have any issues anymore, but then gets more issues in the future".

No this is not the intended use case. The intended use case is "hint users to clean up their list of ignored issues once they are resolved and thus not needed anymore".

But now that you point this out, I notice that this will not work the way I intended if wildcards are used. Maybe this attribute should better be removed again then.

Author: I removed the "resolved" attribute

Other attributes are allowed. Some message kinds may specify additional required attributes.

Example values:

```nix
meta.issues = [
  {
    name = "python2-eol";
    kind = "deprecated";
    message = "This package depends on Python 2, which has reached end of life.";
    date = "1970-01-01";
    urls = [ "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/148779" ];
  }
  {
    kind = "removal";
    message = "The application has been abandoned upstream, use libfoo instead";
    date = "1970-01-01";
  }
];
```

### nixpkgs integration

The following new config options are added to nixpkgs: `ignoreWarnings` and `traceIgnoredWarnings`. The undocumented option `showDerivationWarnings` will be removed. A new environment variable is defined, `NIXPKGS_IGNORE_WARNINGS`.

> `ignoreWarnings` is a list of string of the format `packageName.warningKind`. A wildcard '\*' may be used before or after the dot, to ignore all warnings of one kind or all warnings of a package. For issues that have a name, `packageName.issueName` is allowed too. If an issue spans multiple packages, it is recommended to use the same name everywhere so that one may ignore all with `*.issueName`.

Reviewer 9: > `ignoreWarnings` is a list of string of the format `packageName.warningKind`. A wildcard '\*' may be used before or after the dot, to ignore all warnings of one kind or all warnings of a package. For issues that have a name, `packageName.issueName` is allowed too.

This sounds very easy to accidentally introduce a namespace conflict. What if somebody uses `name = "unsupported"`? I think this should be avoidable.

Author: If somebody said `name = "unsupported"` this would be equivalent of `kind = "unsupported"` w.r.t. ignoring the warning. Of course if the actual `kind` is a different one this would be confusing and generally this should be avoided, but the overall effect of this would be small. Of course, adding a check to forbid such names can easily be implemented.

> Similarly to broken, insecure and unfree packages, evaluating a package with an unignored warning fails evaluation. Ignoring resolved warnings results in a trace warning at evaluation time.

Author: A warning does not tell you anything about how it is handled. The current default behavior is comparable to `-Werror` on compilers, which is admittedly a bit harsh but given that `builtins.trace` messages get so easily drowned it is the less bad option.

Finding a name that correctly captures the wide range of usages this feature will have is not easy, see also the "Bike shedding" section. But suggestions are welcome, and "error" is certainly something to think about.

> Similarly to broken, insecure and unfree packages, evaluating a package with an unignored warning fails evaluation. Ignoring resolved warnings results in a trace warning at evaluation time.

Reviewer 9: I really don't think it's a good idea to confuse the ideas of warnings and errors. I think it's very clearly established that warnings _don't_ throw and end execution, whereas errors _do_.

The previous undocumented warnings system in `check-meta.nix` is removed, together with `showDerivationWarnings`. Instead, ignored warnings are printed with `builtins.trace` depending on the new option `traceIgnoredWarnings`.

### Warning kinds

At the moment, the following values for the `kind` field of a warning are known:

> - `removal`: The package is scheduled for removal some time in the future.

Reviewer 9: I'd argue that scheduled removals should not cause an error like this RFC is seemingly proposing. Or why should they?

Author: Think of it as removing a package by adding a `removal` problem, and then users get some grace period where the package is still available for some time.

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Reviewer 9: This certainly shouldn't cause an error. Deprecation is a process that should first give a non-throwing warning, then an error. We shouldn't skip a step there.

Author: This can now easily be configured globally with the updated proposal.

- `maintainerless`: `meta.maintainers` is empty
- `insecure`: The package has some security vulnerabilities

> - `broken`: The package is marked as broken

Reviewer 9: I'd say let's exclude `broken` for now, because it's unclear what broken means. Ideally I'd like a solution like I describe [here](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/140325#issuecomment-981957417): Clearly separating eval-time, build-time and runtime brokenness.

Author: This is just saying that "broken" is a "known" value for that field. It is intended to mirror the current `meta.broken` attribute.

I am in favor of changes overhauling the broken system, but until they are in place I think it's best to keep it consistent with the existing notion of brokenness.

Reviewer 9: Sounds good

Not all values make sense as issues (i.e. within `meta.issues`): Some warnings may be automatically generated from other `meta` attributes (for example `maintainerless`). New kinds may be added in the future.

## Examples and Interactions
[examples-and-interactions]: #examples-and-interactions

### Package removal

There are two ways issues interact with the removal of packages: Either they get an issue because they are going to be removed, or they are removed because they have an open issue for a prolonged period of time.

> - Instead of removing a package directly, it should first get an issue announcing the planned removal. This will allow users to migrate away beforehand. `removal` must be used as `kind` (This will facilitate automation in the future).

Author: That informal system is so informal that I've never heard of it or encountered it in practice, at least not for the use case of removing outdated packages that still technically work otherwise.

> - Instead of removing a package directly, it should first get an issue announcing the planned removal. This will allow users to migrate away beforehand. `removal` must be used as `kind` (This will facilitate automation in the future).

Reviewer 6: I tried to look for references when I posted that but timed out after a minute to continue with the review. Left it here as a future TODO, something for the future work subheading?

- Instead of removing a package directly, it should first get an issue announcing the planned removal. This will allow users to migrate away beforehand. `removal` must be used as `kind` (This will facilitate automation in the future).

> - Before branch-off for a new release, all (leaf) packages with issues that predate the previous branch-off are deemed safe for removal (unless stated otherwise). If a package is removed based on its issue, the issue's message becomes part of the new `throw` alias.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- Before branch-off for a new release, all (leaf) packages with issues that predate the previous branch-off are deemed safe for removal via `throw` (unless stated otherwise). If a package is removed based on its issue, the issue's message becomes part of the new `throw` alias.
```

Otherwise it's unclear whether the attribute itself is also safe for removal.

Author: I don't think the distinction is that important right here (the interesting part is that the package is gone), but I can add it.

As an example, take `gksu` with the `gksu` → `libgksu` → `libglade` → `python2` dependency chain (for the sake of the example, ignore that it also depends on EOL Gtk 2). Obviously, `python2` should get an issue. As a leaf/application, `gksu` should get one too (it could be the same, or with an adpated message). For the packages in between, it depends on whether they require individual action or not.

### Backporting

New issues generally should not be added to stable branches if possible, and also not be backported to them, since this breaks evaluation. The same rule applies to other changes to a pacakge's `meta` which may generate a warning and thus lead to evaluation failure too. A notable exception are warnings of kind `insecure`, if there is no fix that can be backported.

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

- People have voiced strong negative opinions about the prospect of removing packages from nixpkgs at all, especially when they still *technically* work.

>   - We do not want to encourage the use of unmaintained software likely to contain security vulnerabilities, and we do not have the bandwidth to maintain packages deprecated by upstream. Nothing is lost though, because we have complete binary cache coverage of old nixpkgs versions, providing a comparatively easy way to pin old very package versions.

Reviewer 6: «*Nothing is lost though*» Have you tried running the bigger ones? Icky impurities and having to rebuild the old world with new versions of externally-talking things is not fun. There is a loss.

«likely to contain security vulnerabilities»: Warnings are flexible. We already have `meta.knownVulnerabilities` too.

Author: I have not encountered any major issues so far by pinning down some old dependencies, except for the excessive storage requirements this causes.

The problem about security vulnerabilities, is that they require somebody who cares about you getting the notice. When a package is EOL, this is not guaranteed to happen. Imagine somebody finds a critical bug in Gtk 3. Who will bother to check whether there is a similar exploit in Gtk 2?

Reviewer 6: «Who will bother to check whether there is a similar exploit in Gtk 2?» I'm not sure about Gtk2, but this is a slope; whether a package is abandoned is not binary and we cannot prevent user error. Abandoned software also has less discovered vulnerabilities, which leaves more undiscovered..

«so far by pinning down some old dependencies» – we are improving at that but «excessive storage requirements» are indeed nasty, not to mention build times if you don't «have complete binary cache coverage of old» versions.

-----

The case for making user error harder by doing *something* to tell people vulnerabilities are more likely seems reasonable but dropping seems extreme. Maybe a warning similar to `unmaintained`?

  - This change is a general improvement in the ecosystem even if we do not end up using it to remove any packages.
- There is a slight long-term maintenance burden. It is expected to be similar to or slightly greater than the maintenance of our deprecation aliases.

>   - We expect that in the long term, having a defined process for removing unmaintained and obsolete packages, especially compared to deciding on a case-by-case basis, is likely to reduce the overall maintenance burden.

Reviewer 6: Hydra builder time is valuable too. :+1:

(p.s. defined → automated `^-^`)

- Some of the example interactions are built on the premise that parts of nixpkgs are under-maintained, and that most users are at least somewhat involved in the nixpkgs development process. At the time of writing this RFC this is most certainly true, but the effects on this in the future are unknown.

>   - We hope that drawing attention to packages in need of maintenance can encourage new maintainers -- both from the existing pool of nixpkgs contributors and from non-contributor users -- to step up.

Author: Yes, this needs to be considered thoroughly. One idea I had is to be more verbose on the unstable channels, and then tune down the noise after branch-off. I think this should be discussed explicitly in the RFC, maybe in the "Drawbacks" section

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 6: ~~ Not reviewed or read (by me, yet) beyond this point ~~

A few other sketches about how the declaration syntax might look like in different scenarios:

```nix
{
  # As proposed in the RFC
  meta.issues = [{
    kind = "deprecated";
    name = "python2-eol";
    message = "deprecation: Python 2 is EOL. #12345";
    # (Other fields omitted for brevity)
  }];

  # Issues are defined elsewhere in some nixpkgs-global table, only get referenced in packages
  meta.issues = [ "1234-python-deprecation" ];

  # Attempt to unify both approaches to allow both ad-hoc and cross-package declaration
  meta.issues = {
    "1234-python-deprecation" = {
      message = "deprecation: Python 2 is deprecated #12345";
    };
  };

  # Proposal by @matthiasbeyer
  meta.issues = [
    { transitive = pkgs.python2.issues }
  ];
}
```

## Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- ~~From above: "Ignoring a package without issues (i.e. they have all been resolved) results in a warning at evaluation time". How could this be implemented, and efficiently?~~
  - ~~More generally, how do we tell users that their ignored warning can be removed, so that they won't accidentally miss future warnings?~~

>   - Issues have a `resolved` attribute that may be used for that purpose.

Reviewer 5: When should resolved warnings be removed?

Author: That is a good question. I'd guess a year or so, although I wouldn't mind keeping them indefinitely for now. I'd say let's not make any guarantees for now, and then decide once we have some realistic sample data.

  - The ignore mechanism has been refined so that there is less risk of missing future warnings.
- ~~Should issues be a list or an attrset?~~

>   - We are using a list for now, there is always the possibility to also allow attrsets in the future.

Reviewer 9: The transition from a list to an attribute set is hard, I don't recommend that

  - Unfree package handling will probably be out of scope, since we already have some custom filtering based on licences.
- Inspired by the automation of aliases, managing issues can be helped by tooling as well. This is deemed out of scope of this RFC because only real world usage will tell which actions will be worthwhile automating, but it should definitely considered in the future.
  - There will likely be need for tooling that lists issues on all nixpkgs packages, filtered by kind or sorted chronologically.
  - Automatically removing packages based on time will likely require providing more information whether it is safe to do so or not.
- > If the advisories were a list, and we also added them for modules, maybe we could auto-generate most release notes, and move release notes closer to the code they change. [[source]](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/pre-rfc-package-advisories/19509/4)
  - Issues can certainly be automatically integrated into the release notes somehow. However, this alone would not allow us to move most of our release notes into the packages, because for many release entries breaking eval would be overkill.

## Bike shedding

> *Note: the bike shedding phase is considered over.*

Author: > Overloading the well established term "warning" is really bad. Same with "issue".

All these terms are massively overloaded with meaning, and unsuited for some reason or another. Until somebody actually proposes something better, "issues" remains the least bad proposal so far.

For some use cases, like for packages without maintainers, we do not want to break evaluation of a package and simply warn the user instead. We want the users to configure all these according to their needs and through a single standardized interface.

## Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### Package problems

A new attribute is added to the `meta` section of a package: `problems`. If present, it is a list of attrsets which each have at least the following fields:

- `kind`: Required. If present, the resulting warning will be printed as `kind: message`.
- `message`: Required. A string message describing the issue with the package. The value should:
  - Start with the "This package", "The application" or equivalent, or simply with the package name.
  - Be capitalized (unless it starts with the package name).
  - Use a period at the end.

> - `name`: Required if there are multiple values of the same `kind`. Give the issue a custom name for more easy filtering

Reviewer 9: Coming back to [my suggestion of using an attribute set](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/127#discussion_r995817447), how about using the attribute name as the kind if it's valid? E.g.

```nix
meta.problems.removed = {
    message = "The application has been abandoned upstream, use libfoo instead";
    date = "1970-01-01";
}
```

would automatically be kind `removed`. Additionally specifying a conflicting kind would give an error.

This way you can always guarantee unique names, no need to use a list, and there's no extra verbosity.

Author: Some similar ideas are discussed in the Alternatives section: https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/127/files/1e6725ece081e4828883a418a1f9a1afbd4dcf55#diff-e089f932103f6decfd159bd39420f43fd834106b788fa06956e771ffd0cda991R219-R248

With your proposal, how would you handle problem kinds where there can be multiple instances, like for security issues?

Reviewer 9: Then you explicitly specify the kind:

```nix
{
  problems.foo = {
    kind = "insecure";
    message = "...";
    date = "...";
  };
  problems.bar = {
    kind = "insecure";
    message = "...";
    date = "...";
  };

  # Could also still have
  problems.insecure = {
    message = "...";
    date = "...";
  };
}
```

Reviewer 9: Thinking more about this, for backwards/forwards compatibility no error or warning should be thrown when both the name is a valid kind and `kind =` is specified. In module system terms, it should work like this:

```nix
{ lib, ... }: {
  options.problems = lib.mkOption {
    default = {};
    type = lib.types.attrsOf (lib.types.submodule ({ name, options, ... }: {

      options.kind = lib.mkOption {
        type = lib.types.enum [
          "removal"
          "deprecated"
          "maintainerless"
          "insecure"
          "broken"
          "unsupported"
        ];
      };

      config.kind = lib.mkIf
        (options.kind.type.check name)
        (lib.mkDefault name);

    }));
  };
}
```

Author: I think this approach is less intuitive / more complicated to teach than the currently proposed, but it also has its merits.

Reviewer 9: And I'm just realizing that this is related to [my insistence on not supporting wildcards](https://github.com/NixOS/rfcs/pull/127#discussion_r1056721259), because problem handlers being able to ignore an entire kind of problems is the same as a wildcard and it comes with the same problems (implicitly handling new problems of the same kind that were never shown to the user).

Author: I changed the description of `meta.problems` according to your proposal. Let's keep the wildcards discussion to the other thread.

- `date`: Required. An ISO 8601 `yyyy-mm-dd`-formatted date from when the issue was added.
- `urls`: Optional, list of strings. Can be used to link issues, pull requests and other related items.

Other attributes are allowed. Some message kinds may specify additional required attributes.

Example values:

```nix
meta.problems = [
  {
    name = "python2-eol";
    kind = "deprecated";
    message = "This package depends on Python 2, which has reached end of life.";
    date = "1970-01-01";
    urls = [ "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/148779" ];
  }
  {
    kind = "removal";
    message = "The application has been abandoned upstream, use libfoo instead";
    date = "1970-01-01";
  }
];
```

### Problem kinds

At the moment, the following values for the `kind` field of a warning are known:

- `removal`: The package is scheduled for removal some time in the future.
- `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.
- `maintainerless`: `meta.maintainers` is empty
- `insecure`: The package has some security vulnerabilities
- `broken`: The package is marked as broken
- `unsupported`: The package is not expected to build on this platform

> Not all values make sense for declaration in `meta.problems`: Some may be automatically generated from other `meta` attributes (for example `maintainerless`). New kinds may be added in the future. Furthermore, some kinds are expected to be present only up to once per derivation: for example, we have no use for having multiple `maintainerless` problems, and therefore also no need to give them a name in order to distinguish them.

Reviewer 10: Would anything be generated from `sourceProvenance = lib.sourceTypes.binaryNativeCode;`? I'm of the opinion that not having the option to turn off substitution and build from source makes a package unsecure, but then some only consider that to be an inconvenience (because it's not patchable), so maybe a separate category? And you'd probably want to not flag bootstrapping seeds with a problem that can never be resolved.

Or maybe I should be saving these questions until after the proposal is accepted.

Author: Yes, to which extent the source provenance thing can be integrated into this RFC is an open question, and while we can already discuss it now I wouldn't commit on any of that in the RFC itself (apart from maybe mentioning it as potential future work).

Reviewer 11: > I'm of the opinion that not having the option to turn off substitution and build from source makes a package unsecure,

Me too, so I set `allowNonSource = false;` in `nixpkgs.nix`.  Is there something you want that isn't achieved by that?

Reviewer 10: No, I was just wondering if that had been considered.

### Nixpkgs configuration

The following new config option is added to nixpkgs: `config.problemHandler`. The (currently undocumented) option `config.showDerivationWarnings` will be removed.

> Handler values can be either `"throw"`, `"trace"` or `"ignore"`. Future values may be added in the future. The key is of the form `packageName.problemKind` or `packageName.problemName`, where `"*"` is allowed on either level as a wildcard.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Handler values can be either `"error"`, `"warn"` or `"ignore"`. Future values may be added in the future. The key is of the form `packageName.problemKind` or `packageName.problemName`, where `"*"` is allowed on either level as a wildcard.
```

Seems more fitting since `builtins.trace` could be something other than a warning

Author: I initially chose "throw" and "trace" to make it more clear which Nix functions they map to. But I'm not opposed to using "error" and "warn" instead.

I'd be interested in other people's opinions here.

```nix
problemHandler = {
  "*" = {
    "*" = "throw";
    alias = "trace";
    maintainerless = "ignore";
  };
  myPackage.foo = "ignore";
};
```

If multiple rules match a given problem of a package, the most specific handler will be called:

1. `pkgName.problemName`
2. `pkgName.problemKind`
3. `pkgName."*"`
4. `"*".problemName`
5. `"*".problemKind`

> 6. `"*"."*"`

Reviewer 9: This seems way too powerful. With just `problemHandler."*"."*" = "ignore"` users can ignore all current _and_ future package problems. Once a package gets removed (for any of the problem kinds), they then have no grace period for migration.

Are wildcards really needed? Is this mainly for the Python 2 deprecation which causes a lot of warnings or is there any other use case that needs them? And I think there's better solutions for the Python 2 problem (throw a single warning on `pkgs.python2`; make it easier to manually ignore warnings)

Author: Wildcards are necessary for providing sane defaults in nixpkgs, and for easily managing backwards compatibility when introducing new features. Even though I wouldn't encourage the usage of `"*"."*"` as a user, it wouldn't damn it either: Let's say I have some machines on the stable channel and don't want to deal with them more than twice a year.

Also note that more specific values will override, so one could still have `"*".insecure = "throw"` while ignoring everything else.

Reviewer 9: > Wildcards are necessary for providing sane defaults in nixpkgs

The default in this RFC currently just maps each kind to a handler value. For that you don't need wildcards, you can just have these defaults in the code that handles the kinds.

> easily managing backwards compatibility when introducing new features

What exactly do you mean by that? Do you have an example?

> Let's say I have some machines on the stable channel and don't want to deal with them more than twice a year.

That's already the case: Things can only break when you upgrade from one stable release to the next. Backwards-incompatible changes are not allowed on stable releases.

Author: > For that you don't need wildcards, you can just have these defaults in the code that handles the kinds.

The goal is that people can override those defaults. I don't see how hard-coding some special values allows for that, or how it improves anything really. If your main motivation is to remove globbing because you perceive it as "too powerful", I'd disagree on that part because the most-specific matching. If you really wanted to ignore all warnings, you'd have to do `problemHandler = mkForce { "*"."*" = "ignore"; };` which is rather unlikely to happen accidentally.

> What exactly do you mean by that? Do you have an example?

Yes, for example I want to introduce a new warning kind. It's a less important one, so I'll probably want to set the default value to `trace`/`warn` or `ignore`. This also allows for transition periods where the level is low at introduction and then gradually gets increased once most of `nixpkgs` packages get fixed. All of this would not easily be possible without wildcards.

Reviewer 9: > The goal is that people can override those defaults.

I'm wondering about the use cases though, why do people need to change the defaults?

> Yes, for example I want to introduce a new warning kind. It's a less important one, so I'll probably want to set the default value to `trace`/`warn` or `ignore`. This also allows for transition periods where the level is low at introduction and then gradually gets increased once most of `nixpkgs` packages get fixed. All of this would not easily be possible without wildcards.

There's no need to allow third-parties to specify wildcards for this though. It's totally possible to just change the default internally in nixpkgs until everything is fixed, we can do arbitrary things in CI without affecting the user interface.

Author: > I'm wondering about the use cases though, why do people need to change the defaults?

One use case is to opt in into stricter error messages, globally. This may be required should we migrate the source provenance tracking to use this RFC, for example. A similar use case would be to have pedantic ignore-by-default warnings/lints which are enabled only in CI.

Reviewer 9: > One use case is to opt in into stricter error messages, globally

Ahh that sounds pretty good actually. This use case notably doesn't conflict with my worries of being able to ignore future problems. So for that to work we need something that can only _increase_ the warning level but not decrease it. This _could_ be done with wildcards and an error when you try to decrease the level, but this feels a bit hacky and too powerful to me.

How about just having something like `problemHandler.minimumLevel` that can be either `"ignore"` (the default), `"warn"` or `"error"`. The actual level of any problem will then be the maximum between `problemHandler.minimumLevel` and the hardcoded default for the specific kind.

This does allow the use case of opting into stricter error messages globally while not allowing decreasing the default strictness.

Author: This would not allow us to increase the default level because then suddenly the values people configured may become invalid. (Although this may be worked around with a very careful design.)

I do appreciate creating misuse resistant interfaces, however I think this one errs on the side of being too patronizing. However, we still may add such a safe guard feature later on should people desire it. (It could even make use of its own feature itself, very meta!)

Reviewer 9: > This would not allow us to increase the default level because then suddenly the values people configured may become invalid.

I don't know what you mean by that, which default do you mean and why does it need to be changed?

> However, we still may add such a safe guard feature later on should people desire it.

That doesn't this way though. We can't be _more_ restrictive later (that's backwards incompatible, requires deprecation), we can only be _less_ restrictive later.

Author: Then let's go with the existing names and rules, with the additional strictness enforced in wildcards. There will be the possibility to lift that restriction in the future.

Reviewer 9: But then again, what use cases are not covered by a `problemHandler.minimumLevel` interface that are covered by the wildcards interface?

Author: I don't know. Both "users may accidentally disable important warnings and we should stop them" and "users may genuinely want to do exactly that and we should allow for it" are currently equally possible but unlikely scenarios to me. I don't want to paint myself into a corner here.

Reviewer 9: > Both "users may accidentally disable important warnings and we should stop them" and "users may genuinely want to do exactly that and we should allow for it" are currently equally possible but unlikely scenarios to me.

I'm noticing that we have distilled two separate issues here:
- Being able to decrease the level using wildcards is dangerous and should not be allowed, not now or in the future.
- Being able to increase the level using wildcards does not have any use cases that would be covered by a `problemHandler.minimumLevel`-style setting.

To me this is very clear that wildcards shouldn't be supported.

Reviewer 9: And just to highlight it again: Problem handlers that can ignore all problems of a specific `kind` is the same as a wildcard. So to avoid the same problems, handlers should instead be based on the name of the problem.

### Backwards compatbility, Backporting and stable releases

New problems generally should not be added to stable branches if possible, and also not be backported to them, since it may break evaluation. The same rule applies to other changes to a pacakge's `meta` which may generate a problem and thus lead to evaluation failure too. Scenarios where evaluation failure is a desired goal, for example with unfixable security issues, are obviously exempt from this.

### Removal of packages

The plan is to eventually remove packages with long outstanding problems. The details will be part of future work, but at the very least a package must have a problem whose kind defaults to "throw" for at least one full release cycle (so that stable users have sufficient time to be warned and intervene).

If a package needs to be removed for some other reason, the problem kind `removal` should be used instead:

```nix
meta.problems = [{
  kind = "removal";
  message = "We don't want this in nixpkgs anymore";
  date = "1970-01-01";
}];
```

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> - Too much warnigns may cause Alarm fatigue

Reviewer 11: When I was deciding between gentoo and nixpkgs, this was the major strike against gentoo.  The OS *sends you email*.  And you sort of have to read it, because all the other users do.

That, plus wanting less Python in my life rather than more, is what tipped the balance.

Let's not go that way.

Author: Currently, nixpkgs errs on the other side of the spectrum. It is difficult for you to get notified about changes you care about, especially on the unstable channel. This RFC has started because people wanted to do some backwards-incompatible changes but did not have a good way to properly inform all stakeholders.

  - One idea I had is to be more verbose on the unstable channels, and then tune down the noise after branch-off.
  - New lints to packages should be introduced gradually, by making them "silent" by default on start and only going to "warn" after most problems in nixpkgs itself are resolved.
- People have voiced strong negative opinions about the prospect of removing packages from nixpkgs at all, especially when they still *technically* work.

>   - We do not want to encourage the use of unmaintained software likely to contain security vulnerabilities, and we do not have the bandwidth to maintain packages deprecated by upstream. Nothing is lost though, because we have complete binary cache coverage of old nixpkgs versions, providing a comparatively easy way to pin old very package versions.

Reviewer 11: > We do not want to encourage the use of unmaintained software

This "unmaintained" boogeyman is a problem endemic to poorly-scoped software.  Cough cough browsers cough.

`dnscache`, `tinydns`, and `runit` have been "unmaintained" for two decades and work better than most of their competitors.  Is this RFC going to affect their presence in nixpkgs?

Author: This is not the kind of "unmaintained" the sentence is referring to. Yes, eventually people may start to enforce `maintainers != []` using the features provided by this RFC if they want to, but this will be a new and separate discussion for sure.

This sentence is about all a) packages that are *effectively* unmaintained, i.e. they require some work to keep going but there is nobody and b) packages that are unmaintained or abandoned *by upstream* with no hope of fixing.

And no, "unmaintained" does not imply it's insecure by any means. Personally, I'd like to get to a point where we treat "end of life" as kind-of insecure. And this is not only about security, but also about workload: I do not want us to patch things on software if it is end of life, instead we should have a graceful way of removing it from `nixpkgs`.

For some use cases, like for packages without maintainers, we do not want to break evaluation of a package and simply warn the user instead. We want the users to configure all these according to their needs and through a single standardized interface.

## Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

### Package problems

A new attribute is added to the `meta` section of a package: `problems`. If present, it is a an attribute set of attrsets which each have at least the following fields:

- `kind`: Required. The resulting warning will be printed as `kind: message`. Defaults to the attrset key if absent.
- `message`: Required. A string message describing the issue with the package. The value should:
  - Start with the "This package", "The application" or equivalent, or simply with the package name.
  - Be capitalized (unless it starts with the package name).
  - Use a period at the end.

> - `name`: Inferred from the attrset key if `kind` is specified. Give the issue a custom name for more easy filtering.

Author: Fair enough, that's legacy. Nevertheless, I'm going to mention the name somewhere near that as it still is an important property of a problem.

- `date`: Required. An ISO 8601 `yyyy-mm-dd`-formatted date from when the issue was added.
- `urls`: Optional, list of strings. Can be used to link issues, pull requests and other related items.

Other attributes are allowed. Some message kinds may specify additional required attributes.
The keys in the attribute set are used to infer the `name` or `kind` values within, depending on which is present.

Example values:

```nix
meta.problems = {
  # This one will have the name "python2-eol"
  python2-eol = {
    kind = "deprecated";
    message = "This package depends on Python 2, which has reached end of life.";
    date = "1970-01-01";
    urls = [ "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/issues/148779" ];
  };
  # This one will have no name
  removal = {
    # kind = "removal"; # Inferred from attribute key
    message = "The application has been abandoned upstream, use libfoo instead";
    date = "1970-01-01";
  };
};
```

### Problem kinds

At the moment, the following values for the `kind` field of a warning are known:

- `removal`: The package is scheduled for removal some time in the future.

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Author: The general concept here is correct, although I agree that the name may be misleading. The representative use case for "deprecated" is the Python 2 EOL: some packages can be fixed by upgrading to Python 3 or otherwise removing the Python 2 dependency, others are probably hopeless and doomed.

> they can still be maintained while having EOL dependencies.

IMO it's the other way around: packages with EOL dependencies are in need of maintenance

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Reviewer 12: Also, EOL packages receive security fixes or maintenance only via paid subscriptions usually.

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Reviewer 13: Hello, came to read the rfc after rcp was announced, it's the only thing that bugged me while reading..

It seems there was no conclusion to this comment.

The distinction can be hard to grasp, but I think deprecated and eol/obsolete are clearly different and should be handled differently. 

Mozilla's JS docs uses deprecated/obsolete [here](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Deprecated_and_obsolete_features):
> **deprecated**: still available but planned for removal
> **obsolete**: no longer usable

To me (french, not english-native), obsolete also means that something else took its place. `eol` would be stronger and wouldn't mean that.

Random guy on english stackexchange [says](https://english.stackexchange.com/a/87891):
> **Deprecated** is more or less a "marker", saying that it should not be used, something else that has the same effect has been created, and it is soon to be deleted. It may still work as expected (read the last paragraph on why I say may), but it will vanish soon.
> **Obsolete** means that it no longer works as expected, or doesn't do anything at all.

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Author: @bew, I don't see how this distinction is relevant in this context. The idea behind "deprecation" is, that some package has a problem related to software for which upstream dropped support, and thus needs fixing or removal. Whether or not it currently works is not relevant to me, since this is from a maintainer perspective and not a user perspective.

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Reviewer 12: While I wanted also a distinction, I feel like it's not that important from a maintainer perspective, and I agree with @bew ; though, if, in practice, we found ourselves wanting more, we can always discuss this after extensive experience with that RFC in production.

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Reviewer 13: Ok for tje distinction between deprecated/obsolete/eol.

I'm now also thinking about the wording vs semantic difference between `removal` and `deprecated`.

Something that is marked for `removal` should not be used anymore, this actually looks like the definition of `deprecated` 🤔

Might be confusing, maybe we can rename:
- `removal` to `deprecated` (or don't use `deprecated` at all)
- `deprecated` to `obsolete`/`eol`

What do you think?

> - `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.

Author: I'm fine with changing names as long as we keep the originally intended semantics. I'd prefer to keep "removal" because it's for things "that are about to be removed" so I find it quite fitting. "removal" is a least resort measure, and "deprecated" would be too weak of a word for it.

I'd be fine with renaming "deprecated" to "obsolete" or "eol". Personally I don't mind "deprecated" and don't think the alternatives are a big improvement, but they're fine so if people prefer it we can do that.

> - `maintainerless`: `meta.maintainers` is empty

Author: Good point. How about specifying that some kinds are not allowed for manual declaration in `meta.problems`? I'd nominate `maintainerless`, `broken` and `unsupported` (the latter two are not currently in use either way, they are just reserved for future work)

- `insecure`: The package has some security vulnerabilities
- `broken`: The package is marked as broken

> - `unsupported`: The package is not expected to build on this platform

Author: Yes, I'll mark it as "reserved for future use"

Not all values make sense for declaration in `meta.problems`: Some may be automatically generated from other `meta` attributes (for example `maintainerless`). New kinds may be added in the future. Furthermore, some kinds are expected to be present only up to once per derivation: for example, we have no use for having multiple `maintainerless` problems, and therefore also no need to give them a name in order to distinguish them.

### Nixpkgs configuration

> The following new config options are added to nixpkgs: `config.problemHandler` and `config.problemHandlerDefaultMatchers`. The (currently undocumented) option `config.showDerivationWarnings` will be removed.

Author: Personally not a fan, but I'd like to know the opinion of @roberth on this

> The following new config options are added to nixpkgs: `config.problemHandler` and `config.problemHandlerDefaultMatchers`. The (currently undocumented) option `config.showDerivationWarnings` will be removed.

Author: It's now `config.problems.{handlers,matchers}` (note the plural).

```nix
config.problemHandlerDefaultMatchers = [
  { # Wildcard matcher for everything
    handler = "warn";
  }
  { # Match all security warnings on "hello"
    package = "hello";
    kind = "insecure";
    handler = "error";
  }
  { # Match all packages affected by the python2 deprecation
    name = "python2-eol";
    handler = "error";
  }
  { # Has no effect: the default value is higher
    kind = "insecure";
    handler = "ignore";
  }
  { # Disallowed: use problemHandlers instead
    pkgName = "hello";
    name = "CVE1234";

>     handler = "ignore";

Author: Shouldn't it even be "error" then in that case?

>     handler = "ignore";

Reviewer 9: Ah yes

When the problem requires actions on dependents however, it does not sufficiently inform about all packages that need action. Multiple packages may be annotated with the same problem, in that case it should be given a name and the name should be the same across all instances. Other values like the message or the URL list do not need to be the same and may be adapted sensibly.

### Backwards compatbility, Backporting and stable releases

New problems generally should not be added to stable branches if possible, and also not be backported to them, since it may break evaluation. The same rule applies to other changes to a pacakge's `meta` which may generate a problem and thus lead to evaluation failure too. Scenarios where evaluation failure is a desired goal, for example with unfixable security issues, are obviously exempt from this.

### Removal of packages

The plan is to eventually remove packages with long outstanding problems. The details will be part of future work, but at the very least a package must have a problem whose kind defaults to "error" for at least one full release cycle (so that stable users have sufficient time to be warned and intervene).

> If a package needs to be removed for some other reason, the problem kind `removal` should be used instead:

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
If a package should to be removed for some reason not mapping to a specific kind, the problem kind `removal` should be used instead:
```

Though I wonder if `removal` should even be a problem kind, there's _always_ a reason why something should be removed. What is the motivation for having this kind?

```nix
meta.problems = {
  removal = {

>     message = "We don't want this in nixpkgs anymore";

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
    message = "This package will be removed from Nixpkgs.";
```

Adhering to your own message format suggestions :)

Author: TBF I think those formatting guidelines came from a review comment?

  - ~~More generally, how do we tell users that their ignored warning can be removed, so that they won't accidentally miss future warnings?~~
  - ~~Issues have a `resolved` attribute that may be used for that purpose.~~
    - Properly implementing this turned out to be non-trivial, so this feature was cut for the sake of simplicity as it was not of high importance anyways.
  - The ignore mechanism has been refined so that there is less risk of missing future warnings.
- ~~Should issues be a list or an attrset?~~·
  - ~~We are using a list for now, there is always the possibility to also allow attrsets in the future.~~
  - Current design uses an attribute set
- Currently, many of the relevant nixpkgs configuration options can also be set impurely via environment variables. The `config.problemHandler` option does however not easily map to some environment variable.
  - When merging existing features into the problems system, existing environment variable will keep working in the future.
  - Maybe using less environment variables is all for the better?

>   - We may always add specific environment variables for specific use cases where needed without having to expose the full expression power of the configuration options.

Reviewer 14: I consider environment variables to overwrite the "refusing of evaluation" quite important.
For example, i quite often install packages with `nix profile` (previously with `nix-env`), because it is faster and i don't want to edit my NixOS configuration for these minor package additions. I also use `allowUnfreePredicate` to only enable some unfree Packages. Sometimes the need arises to install an unfree package with `nix profile`, so i do 
```
env NIXPKGS_ALLOW_UNFREE=1 nix profile install --impure nixpkgs#hello-unfree
```

I haven't done that for broken packages, yet, but i can imagine it being an inconvenience if it wasn't possible for the issue handlers to be overwritten impurely.

Author: Just to be clear: Existing environment variables will continue working.

Reviewer 15: At the same time, they will be _the only_ way to mass-override `unsupported`?

Author: I'm not sure I understand your question. Why the only way?

Reviewer 15: Can you lower from `error` to `warn` via `matchers`? I thought that `handlers` need to be package-by-package, and `matchers` cannot lower severity below the default?

(Presumably if `unsupported` replaces `platforms` it defaults to `error`)

Reviewer 9: That's a good point. Arguably problems like `unsupported` or `broken` should be safe to ignore generally, while `insecure` ones aren't..

Maybe the distinction here is that `unsupported` and `broken` are errors at evaluation time that would otherwise happen at build/runtime, while `insecure` wouldn't give any other error.

Author: I've personally almost never interacted with `unsupported` and only rarely with `broken`, do you think that not being able to mass-disable them is a big issue?

On the other hand, my previous design for this RFC included some pretty YOLO wildcard capabilities, so I'll have no problems with selectively relaxing the "no downgrade" restriction should there be need for it.

Also, for better or for worse, the existing environment variables will keep working for a long time due to backwards compatibility. It's a bit weird, but there's nothing we can really do about it.

Reviewer 15: Maybe some thing can be downgraded to warn but not to nothing.

The use case for mass-overriding unsupported/broken/etc. is e.g. «so with the new and improved stdenv for this kind of BSD which has partial Linux compatibility, which of the presumed-Linux-only-packages will now build?»

Sure, on non-cross Linux `broken` usually is in some connection to reality; for new or reworked exotic stdenvs (Tier 3 or 4 platforms, including cross or maybe musl or whatever) «there were reasons to guess Linux-only or x86_64-only, and nobody had a setup to try» is pretty normal and quickly estimating the amount of work to get something working is useful.

---
feature: issues-warnings
start-date: 2022-06-11
author: piegames
co-authors: —

> shepherd-team: @lheckemann, @mweinelt, @fgaz

Reviewer 4: @fgaz stated they needed to drop out of the shepherds team.

> shepherd-team: @lheckemann, @mweinelt, @fgaz

Author: Also, @infinisil. But yes, I'll update the line

  - Packages are already being removed for various reasons on a regular basis. Now we can properly warn users about this in advance.
- `deprecated`: The package has been abandoned upstream or has end of life dependencies.
  - Currently we do mass-pings for all maintainers of affected packages, although many packages are under-maintained. This allows to warn users who depend on that package as last resort stake holders.
- `maintainerless`: `meta.maintainers` is empty. Cannot be manually declared in `meta.problems`. Only up to one instance per package.
  - This is currently provided by `config.showDerivationWarnings`, which is only used by Hydra.
- `insecure`: (Reserved for future use.) The package has some security vulnerabilities.
  - This will hopefully replace the existing insecure warnings (`meta.knownVulnerabilities`, `config.permittedInsecurePackages`) in the future (see Future work).
- `broken`: (Reserved for future use.) The package is broken in some way.
  - This will hopefully replace or enhance `meta.broken` in the future (see Future work).
- `unsupported`: (Reserved for future use.) The package is not expected to build on this platform.

>   - This will hopefully replace `meta.platforms` and `meta.badPlatforms` in the future (see Future work).

Reviewer 15: Should there be a reservation for unfree licenses? In other places `unfree` is listed among the things to handle…

(This is a minor nitpick and I believe that neither resolution of it should affect FCP)

Author: I had it in there in the past, however `unfree` is one of the most complicated ones to adapt due to its powerful licensing and predicate options. It *might* be a thing to happen in the future, and I really hope so, but honestly I can't make any promises here. Maybe I'll see a path for it after getting experience with implementing the others (which I'm a lot more optimistic about generally), we'll see.

A new attribute is added to the `meta` section of a package: `issues`. If present, it is a list of attrsets which each have the following fields:

- `message`: Required. A string message describing the issue with the package.
- `kind`: Optional but recommended. If present, the resulting warning will be printed as `kind: message`.
- `date`: Required. An ISO 8601 `yyyy-mm-dd`-formatted date from when the issue was added.
- `urls`: Optional, list of strings. Can be used to link issues, pull requests and other related items.

Example values:

```nix
meta.issues = [{
  kind = "deprecated";

>   message = "This package depends on Python 2, which has reached end of life.";

Reviewer 4: I think this "issue" is the prime example where I would expect a transitive warning for an issue we set once on python2.  I'm not sure why you would want to stick it onto a reverse-dependency.

Author: The section "Propagation across transitive dependencies" below explains the mechanism behind it in detail. In short, just putting the issue to Python will indeed stop evaluation for all transitive dependencies, but ignoring it will also do so for all of them so users would only get the warning for one affected package.

meta.problems = {
  removal = {
    message = "This package will be removed from Nixpkgs.";
  };
  # Probably some more problems here
};
```

The plan is to eventually remove packages with long outstanding problems of some kinds. The details will be part of future work, but users will be warned sufficiently in advance to give them the chance to intervene: Before removing a package, it should have a `removal` annotation for at least one full release cycle.

### Package declarations outside of Nixpkgs

> Since package checks are done via "check-meta" called by `mkDerviation`, these problems can also be declared and checked in third-party packages outside of Nixpkgs.

Reviewer 12: mkDerivation

This is not always desirable though, since third-party packages do not necessarily need to abide by the standards in Nixpkgs (e.g. having maintainer fields).
Because of this, the implementation needs to ensure no warnings or errors get generated without a `meta` declaration to keep the noise for third-parties to a minimum. (The idea being that third-party packages commonly don't specify a `meta` attribute in the first place.)

## Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> - Too much warnigns may cause Alarm fatigue

Reviewer 12: warnings
